feat: new blog post about the injector (#84)
satellytes/satellytes.com: blog-posts/angular-inject-the-injector.md

---
path: "/blog/angular-inject-the-injector"
date: "2021-06-08"
title: "The \"Inject the Injector\" pattern"
featuredImage: images/georgios-kaleadis-aBTfTMsOCOI-unsplash.jpg 

> imageCredits: We want to credit people for their work

Reviewer: should this actually list people to credit for images?

Author: yes, then I switched plans and just took my own image but actually I would like to ship this feature with this PR so I try to push a change along the text update. Thank for the hint!

shortSummary: A coding pattern to prevent breaking changes when dealing with injections in base classes used in distributed libraries
author: "Georgios Kaleadis"
authorSummary: "CTO at Satellytes"
---
 

> We maintain a successful proprietary enterprise library based on Angular. One challenge while doing so are breaking changes. Those occur naturally while we improve and extend the library. There was one particular type of breaking change that caused us some trouble, and we want to show you how we tackled it for good.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We maintain a successful proprietary enterprise library based on Angular. One challenge while doing so is how to deal with breaking changes. Those occur naturally while we improve and extend the library. There was one particular type of breaking change that caused us some trouble, and we want to show you how we tackled it for good.
```

just thinking out loud, maybe the adjective "successful" sounds a bit like patting ourselves on the shoulder in the first sentence of an introductory paragraph. maybe something along the lines of "in widespread use within a large enterprise organization" could be considered as an alternative. definitely not a big issue though.

Author: thank you, I like the change and accepted it.

Author: I keep the successful for now, let's see how it fells in the end.

  private mySubscribeService: MySubscribeService;
  private myTrackingService: MyTrackingService;
  public myRemoteHomeService: MyRemoteHomeService;
  
  constructor(@Inject(Injector) injector: Injector) {
    this.mySubscribeService = injector.get<AclService>(MySubscribeService)!;
    this.myTrackingService = injector.get<AclService>(MyTrackingService)!;
    this.myRemoteHomeService =  injector.get<AclService>(MyRemoteHomeService)!;
  }
}
```

Every subclass can safely extend from `MyAbstractBaseComponent` and define additional services. The base class itself can add additional injected services without ever breaking the subclass. We literally inject every possible value by providing the injector itself which acts as the bucket for any future service we might want to access. That generalization is the core of this pattern.   

```typescript
@Component({
  selector: 'my-selector',
  template: `...`
})
export class UnsubscribeToolComponent extends MyAbstractBaseComponent {
  constructor(
    @Inject(Injector) injector: Injector,
    @Inject(MyService) myService: MyService
  ) {
    super(injector)
  }
}
```

## Our starting point

> In order to understand the problem we will look at the following Angular base class that act as the functional foudnation for derived explicit components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to understand the problem we will look at the following Angular base class that acts as the functional foundation for derived concrete components.
```
two little typos and I changed "explicit" to "concrete" because that might be a slightly better choice of words. However, I think "derived components" without the additional adjective would be clear enough. imo the additional adjective doesn't add anything in terms of meaning.

Author: now reading this I recognize that `explicit` might be more related to content suited for adults 😁 but it's perfectly harmless in the dictionary. Thanks for the catch. Changes accepted

```typescript
@Directive()
export class MyAbstractBaseComponent implements OnInit {
  constructor(
    @Inject(MySubscribeService) private mySubscribeService: MySubscribeService,
    @Inject(MyTrackingService) private  myTrackingService: MyTrackingService
  ) { }
  
  ngOnInit(){
    this.myTrackingService.trigger();
  }
  
  subscribe() {
    this.mySubscribeService.doSomething();
  }
}
```

> That base class provides a set of default functionality for any other component extending from it in the future. This not only saves repeated work on the side of the component authors. This acts as an alignment & contract between all derived components. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That base class provides default functionality for any other component extending from it in the future. This not only saves repeated work on the side of the component authors, but also acts as an alignment & contract between all derived components. 
```
Just a suggestion that is a little easier on the eye (at least at mine).

Author: I love short sentences but sometimes they get too short. I like your change and accept it.

The `MyAbstractBaseComponent` will be delivered through a core library and extended by dozens of other components.

> Like the following imaginary subscription component:

Reviewer: I'd suggest to merge this into one sentence ."..by dozens of other components like the following imaginary subscription component:"
It's not that I don't **like** the imaginary component that follows ;-) just that the word "like" should rather be interpreted as "for example" in this case.

Author: I **like** it and it's prepare on my local changes 😄

```typescript
@Component({
  selector: 'my-subscription',
  template: `<button (click)="subscribe()">subscribe now</button>`
})
export class SubscriptionComponent extends MyAbstractBaseComponent {
}
```

The `SubscriptionComponent` is guaranteed to invoke the one service through `ngOnInit` as described by the parent class plus it can access the `subscribe` method from the parent class as the service `mySubscribeService` is readily available to be invoked by `subscribe()`.

> Things get complicated the moment library authors starts to get a little more advanced. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Things get complicated the moment library authors start to get a little more advanced. 
```
Just a little typo. However, the first sentence tripped me up a bit. Nothing to put my finger on, but the choice of words "authors getting advanced" seems a bit odd and I'm not sure everyone will immediately understand that you're talking about the programming experience of authors. Just a suggestion, maybe something along the lines of "Things get complicated the moment library authors implement slightly more advanced use cases"?

Author: In the local changes batched like this. Thanks.
> Things get complicated the moment library authors implement slightly more advanced use cases, like in the following component.

Look at the following slightly more advanced component.

```typescript
@Component({
  selector: 'my-unsubscribe-tool',
  template: `<button (click)="unsubscribe()">unsubscribe</button>`
})
export class UnsubscribeToolComponent extends MyAbstractBaseComponent {
  constructor(
    @Inject(MySubscribeService) mySubscribeService: MySubscribeService,
    @Inject(MyTrackingService)  myTrackingService: MyTrackingService,
    @Inject(MyUnsubscribeService) private myUnsubscribeService: MyUnsubscribeService
  ) {
    super(mySubscribeService, myTrackingService)
  }
  
  unsubscribe() {
    this.myUnsubscribeService.trigger();
  }
}
```

The class `UnsubscribeToolComponent` is in desperate need to access a custom service `MyUnsubscribeService` whose functionality is not provided by the base class. Fair enough, they chose to inject that service. The injection itself looks complicated though, because the author needs to repeat the injection to forward the two service instances `mySubscribeService` & `myTrackingService` to the parent class. 

> Otherwise, the solution works pretty well. Great.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides, the solution works pretty well. Great.
```
"Otherwise" could maybe be interpreted as "it would, but it doesn't".

Author: Oh you are right. Accepted

## The problem

> The core team decides to extend the functionality of the base class. They want to ship a new service `MyRemoteHomeService` to all subclasses and offer a new method `lightsOff` ready to be used. This is adding some new feature and shouldn't cause much trouble, should it ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core team decides to extend the functionality of the base class. They want to ship a new service `MyRemoteHomeService` to all subclasses and offer a new method `lightsOff` ready to be used. This is adding some new feature and shouldn't cause much trouble, should it?
```

Author: I ALWAYS do this. I don't know when I learned that wrong pattern of inserting a space before the question mark in a sentence. Thanks!

Let's look at the base class again and its added functionality in the following diff.

```diff-typescript
@Directive()
export class MyAbstractBaseComponent implements OnInit {
  constructor(
    @Inject(MySubscribeService) private mySubscribeService: MySubscribeService,
    @Inject(MyTrackingService) private  myTrackingService: MyTrackingService,
+   @Inject(MyRemoteHomeService) public  myRemoteHomeService: MyRemoteHomeService
  ) { }
  
   /* [... redacted methods] */
  
+  lightsOff() {
+    this.myRemoteHomeService.lightsOff();
+  }
}
```
You can clearly see the appearance of `MyRemoteHomeService` and the method `lightsOff()` using it.

The team decides not to mark it as a `BREAKING CHANGE`, because, well it can't break anything because it **adds** functionality. They will ship it as version `V1.1`. Soon after the release the maintainers of the advanced component `UnsubscribeToolComponent` complain that their component fails to compile.

The reason gets obvious pretty quickly. The local team didn't know about the service added by the core team. On the other side they rely on repeating the constructor signature in order to provide all expected dependencies.

> The team's fix is simple, but it came by surprise, and it created a lot of confusion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The team's fix is simple, but it came by surprise and it created a lot of confusion.
```
Not sure if there's a grammar rule for that, but imo it reads more fluently without a comma preceding the conjunction "and".

Author: Commas are something I don't understand in English. It's almost random for me how people use it. If there a commas I might have blindly accepted suggestions from my local IDE and if you have an opinion here I prefer the human before the machine 🤓

```diff-typescript
@Component({
  selector: 'my-unsubscribe-tool',
  template: `<button (click)="unsubscribe()">unsubscribe</button>`
})
export class UnsubscribeToolComponent extends MyAbstractBaseComponent {
  constructor(
    @Inject(MySubscribeService) mySubscribeService: MySubscribeService,
    @Inject(MyTrackingService)  myTrackingService: MyTrackingService,
+   @Inject(MyRemoteHomeService) public  myRemoteHomeService: MyRemoteHomeService,
    @Inject(MyUnsubscribeService) myUnsubscribeService: MyUnsubscribeService
  ) {
+    super(mySubscribeService, myTrackingService, myRemoteHomeService)
  }
  
  unsubscribe() {
    this.myUnsubscribeService.trigger();
  }
}
```
What did they do? They had to repeat the injection of `MyUnsubscribeService` to forward the instance through the `super()` invocation. 

> The core team created a breaking change by adding an innocent new feature because they did not recognize that slightly more advanced users of their library are overriding the constructor. The team could stop here, because they are now aware of the problem, and the next change of the constructor will be marked as a breaking change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core team created a breaking change by adding an innocent new feature because they did not recognize that slightly more advanced users of their library are overriding the constructor. The team could stop here, because they are now aware of the problem and the next change of the constructor will be marked as a breaking change.
```
same suggestion as in the comment above

## The solution
We have gone through this various times in different places. We announced the breaking change carefully, we even wrote migrations to automatically fix or at least warn the user about the problem. It remained a cumbersome experience, so we pursued another solution: **Inject the Injector**.

Let's start with the solution:

```typescript
import { Directive, Inject, Injector } from '@angular/core';

@Directive()
export class MyAbstractBaseComponent implements OnInit {
  private mySubscribeService: MySubscribeService;
  private myTrackingService: MyTrackingService;
  public myRemoteHomeService: MyRemoteHomeService;
  
  constructor(@Inject(Injector) injector: Injector) {
    this.mySubscribeService = injector.get<AclService>(MySubscribeService)!;
    this.myTrackingService = injector.get<AclService>(MyTrackingService)!;
    this.myRemoteHomeService =  injector.get<AclService>(MyRemoteHomeService)!;
  }
}
```

Can you see the elegance here? We inject the injector, which is the engine of the dependency injection (DI) system in Angular itself and then request the singleton instances of our desired services to assign them to the local variables as before.

> The injector has the correct typing, that the result might be undefined, that's why we convince TypeScript with the [non-null assertion operator (!)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/release-notes/typescript-2-0.html#non-null-assertion-operator) that we guarantee to receive a value. That's possible because we control the environment, and the services are guaranteed to be available as they are provided in the root (`@Injectable({providedIn: 'root' })`).

Reviewer: The first sentence reads a bit awkward. Maybe if we turned it around, it would be easier to understand. What do you think about the following suggestion?

We need to use the non-null assertion operator (!) to tell TypeScript that we guarantee to receive a value, because the typing of the injector correctly states that the result might be undefined.

Author: yes indeed. I think the sentence is a left over how I developed the sentence in my mind where I'm coming from the problem and then justify it by the operator. Sounds much better the other way around.

> In case we decide to add a fourth of fifth service in the base class, we can now add it and request it directly from the injector without breaking any subclass as the constructor signature stays the same. See how many lines of random services the team are not even interested in, can now be replaced:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case we decide to add a fourth or fifth service in the base class, we can now add it and request it directly from the injector without breaking any subclass as the constructor signature stays the same. See how many lines of random services, in which the feature teams are not even interested in, can now be replaced:
```
one little typo and a suggestion to fix the use of "are" in conjunction with the singular "team" in the last part of the sentence.

Author: thank you

```diff-typescript
@Component({
  selector: 'my-unsubscribe-tool',
  template: `<button (click)="unsubscribe()">unsubscribe</button>`
})
export class UnsubscribeToolComponent extends MyAbstractBaseComponent {
  constructor(
    @Inject(Injector) injector: Injector
-   @Inject(MySubscribeService) mySubscribeService: MySubscribeService,
-   @Inject(MyTrackingService)  myTrackingService: MyTrackingService,
-   @Inject(MyRemoteHomeService) public  myRemoteHomeService: MyRemoteHomeService,
    @Inject(MyUnsubscribeService) myUnsubscribeService: MyUnsubscribeService
  ) {
-    super(mySubscribeService, myTrackingService, myRemoteHomeService)
+    super(injector)
  }
  
  unsubscribe() {
    this.myUnsubscribeService.trigger();
  }
}
```

> resulting in this much more compact version of a constructor.

Reviewer: This is not a complete sentence. Not a problem per se, but maybe not in perfect harmony with style of writing in this article. How about "The result is a much more compact version of the original constructor."?

Author: I added the following changes locally. Thank you

> The result is a much more compact version of the original constructor.

```typescript
@Component(/*...*/)
export class UnsubscribeToolComponent extends MyAbstractBaseComponent {
  constructor(
    @Inject(Injector) injector: Injector
    @Inject(MyUnsubscribeService) myUnsubscribeService: MyUnsubscribeService
  ) {
    super(injector)
  }
  
  /*...*/
}
```

## Conclusion

> Handling breaking changes is an act of empathy 💛. You want to protect your users from struggling with your changes. The "inject the injector" pattern we have introduced here helped us a lot and made it very easy to extend our base class without breaking things anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Handling breaking changes is an act of empathy 💛. You want to protect your users from struggling with your changes. The "inject the injector" pattern we have introduced here helped us a lot and made it very easy to extend our base class without breaking things.
```
I think I might just omit the last word "anymore".

> It's always advisable to be more specific instead of using generalized concepts like described in this blog post. Your code will be less abstract, better readable and maintainable. Use this approach only if you have very good reasons to do so 👍 This is a highly specific pattern for our distributed library project. In case you're developing individual components that are not distributed to other developers you most probably should not care for breaking changes and patterns like that.

Reviewer: "It's always advisable to be more specific instead of using generalized concepts like described in this blog post." - I'm not sure I understand what you mean to say by that. Is it synonymous to 
"It's always advisable to be as specific as possible rather than using generalized concepts like the one we describe in this blog post"?
The last sentence in this paragraph suggests that this is supposed to be disclaimer of sorts. I think I get what you're saying, but maybe something along the lines of
"In case you're developing individual components that are not distributed to other developers you most probably have no need to prevent the occurrence of breaking changes by means of patterns like that"
would be a better choice of words? What developer in their right mind would not care for all sorts of patterns and breaking changes? I think what we want to say is that unless you find yourself working with a large codebase and distributed teams in a typical enterprise organization, dealing with breaking changes is much easier and introducing a pattern like this might not be necessary or even beneficial.

Author: You understood me correctly. Actually I wrote this as a word of warning at the beginning of the blog post thinking of the people taking such a pattern and over complicating their simple project. I wanted to clarify that this is only suitable for distributed libraries. I like your last summary and here my updated sentence:

> Introducing a pattern like this might not be necessary or even beneficial if you are not working with a large codebase and distributed teams in a typical enterprise organization. Never use this pattern only to save a few lines of code, you will make your code less understandable.
